
zonebudget(1)      U.S. Geological Survey (wrdapp)      zonebudget(1)


NAME
       zonebudget - Program for computing subregional water budgets
                    for MODFLOW ground-water flow models

ABSTRACT
       Zonebudget (ZONBUD) is a computer program that computes
       subregional water budgets using results from the MODFLOW ground-
       water flow model.  The user designates the subregions by specifying
       zone numbers.  A separate budget is computed for each zone.  The
       budget for a zone includes a component of flow between each adjacent
       zone.

METHOD
       ZONBUD reads a file of budget data that MODFLOW can write.  This
       file must contain values for each flow component at every model
       cell.  ZONBUD then accumulates each flow component for all the
       cells in each specified zone.

HISTORY
       Version 3.2 1/15/2022 -- updated to improve error messages and
          support MODFLOW-OWHM BAS keyword CONSTANT_HEAD_BUDGET_OPTIONAL.
          This option indicates that the '   CONSTANT HEAD' array should not
          be written to the CBC if there are not constant head cells.
          Previously, Zonebudget required the '   CONSTANT HEAD' array.
          
       Version 3.01 12/18/2009 -- updated to fix a problem in the csv2
          output file when a simulation has both transient and
          steady-state stress periods.  In this situation, the STORAGE
          column label was absent if the first stress period is steady
          state; however, the storage values were written for the
          transient time steps. The updated code always includes a
          storage column label, and the storage value is 0 for the
          steady-state time steps.  Also reduced the time needed to
          determine that a budget file is double precision.

       Version 3.0 9/19/2008 -- updated to automatically read single
          precision and double precision cell-by-cell budget files.  The
          ability to write data into a comma-delimited file for use by
          a spreadsheet program was added also.  The input for the zone
          file has been updated to allow free format.

       Version 2.1 2000/04/18 - updated to allow specifiers for opening
          unformatted files to be easily modified.  The personal computer
          version of the code is being distributed using unstructured
          unformatted files.

       Version 2.0 2000/04/24 - updated to read compact budget files that
          MODFLOW-96 and MODFLOW-2000 can optionally write.  Compact budget
          files use less disk space.  They also include additional information
          that allows multiple budget values of the same type at the same cell
          (for eample, river seepage) to be differentiated.  In such
          situations, ZONBUD did not tabulate the budget in the same
          manner as MODFLOW (see USGS OFR 90-392, p. 3).  By using the Compact
          budget files and version 2.0 of ZONBUD, the budget will always be
          tabulated in the same manner by MODFLOW and ZONBUD.  Note further
          that when the CHTOCH option is used in MODFLOW-2000, which is used
          when simulating contaminant transport, then ZONBUD will produce
          incorrect results in some situations unless the COMPACT budget
          option is used.  (The incorrect results can occur if there is flow
          between adjacent constant-head cells.)  For the above reasons, it
          is recommended that the MODFLOW Compact budget option be used
          whenever ZONBUD will be used to analyze the budget file.  This
          assures correct and consistent results, and minimizes the amount
          of disk space.

       Version 1.0 1996/12/20 - version published in USGS OFR 90-392.  Note
          that this version will not work with cell-by-cell budget files
          that are written using the optional compact format available in
          MODFLOW-96.  That is, to use ZONBUD version 1.0 with
          MODFLOW-96, the compact cell-by-cell budget option must NOT be
          used.

DATA REQUIREMENTS
       In order to use ZONBUD, all cell-by-cell budget terms for a
       MODFLOW simulation must be saved in a file when MODFLOW is executed.
       As described above in the HISTORY section, it is best to save the
       cell-by-cell budget data using the COMPACT format, which is an option
       that was added to MODFLOW-96 and further enhanced in MODFLOW-2000.
       Depending on the specific zones that are desired, a zone file must
       also be prepared.

OUTPUT OPTIONS
       The output is a listing file that contains a flow budget for each
       zone.

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS
       ZONBUD is written in Fortran 90.  Generally, the program is easily
       installed on most computer systems. The code has been used on
       UNIX-based and Microsoft Windows based computers.

DOCUMENTATION
       Harbaugh, A.W., 1990, A computer program for calculating subregional
          water budgets using results from the U.S. Geological Survey
          modular three-dimensional ground-water flow model: U.S.
          Geological Survey Open-File Report 90-392, 46 p.
          
       Documentation about changes to the version 3 code changes are
       contained in file zonbud3.pdf, which is distributed with the
       Zonebudget Version 3 code.

RELATED DOCUMENTATION
       Harbaugh, A.W., 2005, MODFLOW-2005, the U.S. Geological Survey modular
          ground-water model -- the Ground-Water Flow Process: U.S. Geological
          Survey Techniques and Methods 6-A16, variously p.

       McDonald, M.G., and Harbaugh, A.W., 1988, A modular three-
          dimensional finite-difference ground-water flow model: U.S.
          Geological Survey Techniques of Water-Resources Investigations,
          book 6, chap. A1, 586 p.

       Harbaugh, A.W., and McDonald, M.G., 1996, User's documentation for
          MODFLOW-96, an update to the U.S. Geological Survey modular
          finite-difference ground-water flow model: U.S. Geological Survey
          Open-File Report 96-485, 56 p.

       Harbaugh, A.W., Banta, E.R., Hill, M.C., and McDonald, M.G., 1996,
          MODFLOW-2000, the U.S. Geological Survey modular ground-water
          model -- user guide to modularization concepts and the ground-water
          flow process: U.S. Geological Survey Open-File Report 00-92.

CONTACTS
       Operation:
          U.S. Geological Survey
          Office of Ground Water
          Arlen Harbaugh
          411 National Center
          Reston, VA 20192

          harbaugh@usgs.gov
